Add guide: Detect anomalies in nodes and applications with Netdata (#10451)
netdata/netdata: docs/guides/monitor/anomaly-detection.md

<!--
title: "Detect anomalies in systems and applications"
description: "Detect anomalies in any system, container, or application in your infrastructure with machine learning and the open-source Netdata Agent."
image: /img/seo/guides/monitor/anomaly-detection.png
custom_edit_url: https://github.com/netdata/netdata/edit/master/docs/guides/monitor/anomaly-detection.md
-->

# Detect anomalies in systems and applications

Beginning with v1.27, the [open-source Netdata Agent](https://github.com/netdata/netdata) is capable of unsupervised
[anomaly detection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anomaly_detection) with machine learning (ML). As with all things
Netdata, the anomalies collector comes with preconfigured alarms and instant visualizations that require no query
languages or organizing metrics. You configure the collector to look at specific charts, and it handles the rest.

Netdata's implementation uses a handful of functions in the [Python Outlier Detection (PyOD)
library](https://github.com/yzhao062/pyod/tree/master), which first runs a `train` function that learns what "normal"

> looks like on your node and creates an ML model, then utilizes the `predict_proba()` and `predict()` functions to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
looks like on your node and creates an ML model for each chart, then utilizes the `predict_proba()` and `predict()` functions to
```

> visualize how anomalous certain metrics are.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
visualize how anomalous certain charts are.
```

> All these metrics and alarms are available for centralized monitoring in [Netdata Cloud](https://app.netdata.cloud), if

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All these metrics and alarms are available for centralized monitoring in [Netdata Cloud](https://app.netdata.cloud).
```

> you choose to sign up and claim your nodes, which empowers you to run tailored anomaly detection on every node in your

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you choose to sign up for Cloud and claim your nodes, you will have the ability to run tailored anomaly detection on every node in your
```

repo](https://github.com/netdata/community/tree/main/netdata-agent-api/netdata-pandas).

```bash
# Become the netdata user
sudo su -s /bin/bash netdata

# Install required packages for the netdata user
pip3 install --user netdata-pandas==0.0.32 numba==0.50.1 scikit-learn==0.23.2 pyod==0.8.3
```

> If the `pip3` command fails, you need to install it. For example, on an Ubuntu system, use `sudo apt install
> python3-pip`.

Use `exit` to become your normal user again.

## Enable the anomalies collector

Navigate to your [Netdata config directory](/docs/configure/nodes.md#the-netdata-config-directory) and use `edit-config`
to open the `python.d.conf` file.

```bash
sudo ./edit-config python.d.conf
```

In `python.d.conf` file, search for the `anomalies` line. If the line exists, set the value to `yes`. Add the line
yourself if it doesn't already exist. Either way, the final result should look like:

```conf
anomalies: yes
```

[Restart the Agent](/docs/configure/start-stop-restart.md) with `sudo systemctl restart netdata` to start up the
anomalies collector. By default, the model training process runs every 30 minutes, and uses the previous 4 hours of

> metrics to establish a baseline for health and performance across the default charts to include.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
metrics to establish a baseline for health and performance across the default charts included.
```

`charts_regex` allows for some basic regex, such as wildcards (`*`) to match all contexts with a certain pattern. For
example, `system\..*` matches with any chart wit ha context that begins with `system.`, and ends in any number of other
characters (`.*`). Note the escape character (`\`) around the first period to capture a period character exactly, and
not any character.

Change `charts_regex` in `anomalies.conf` to the following:

```conf
    charts_regex: 'system\..*|nginx_local\..*|web_log_nginx\..*|apps.cpu|apps.mem'
```

This value tells the anomaly collector to train against every `system.` chart, every `nginx_local` chart, every
`web_log_nginx` chart, and specifically the `apps.cpu` and `apps.mem` charts.

![The anomalies collector chart with many
dimensions](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1153921/102813877-db5e4880-4386-11eb-8040-d7a1d7a476bb.png)

### Remove some metrics from anomaly detection

As you can see in the above screenshot, this node is now looking for anomalies in many places. The result is a single
`anomalies_local.probability` chart with more than twenty dimensions, some of which the dashboard hides at the bottom of

> a scroll-able area. In addition, training and analyzing the anomaly collector on this many charts might require more CPU

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a scroll-able area. In addition, training and analyzing the anomaly collector on these many charts might require more CPU
```

utilization that you're willing to give.

First, explicitly declare which `system.` charts to monitor rather than of all of them using regex (`system\..*`).

```conf
    charts_regex: 'system\.cpu|system\.load|system\.io|system\.net|system\.ram|nginx_local\..*|web_log_nginx\..*|apps.cpu|apps.mem'
```

Next, remove some charts with the `charts_to_exclude` setting. For this example, using an Nginx web server, focus on the
volume of requests/responses, not, for example, which type of 4xx response a user might receive.

```conf
    charts_to_exclude: 'web_log_nginx.excluded_requests,web_log_nginx.responses_by_status_code_class,web_log_nginx.status_code_class_2xx_responses,web_log_nginx.status_code_class_4xx_responses,web_log_nginx.current_poll_uniq_clients,web_log_nginx.requests_by_http_method,web_log_nginx.requests_by_http_version,web_log_nginx.requests_by_ip_proto'
```

![The anomalies collector with less
dimensions](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1153921/102820642-d69f9180-4392-11eb-91c5-d3d166d40105.png)

> Apply the ideas behind the collector's regex and excluding settings to any other

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apply the ideas behind the collector's regex and exclude settings to any other
```

[system](/docs/collect/system-metrics.md), [container](/docs/collect/container-metrics.md), or
[application](/docs/collect/application-metrics.md) metrics you want to detect anomalies for.

## What's next?

Now that you know how to set up unsupervised anomaly detection in the Netdata Agent, using an Nginx web server as an

> example, time to apply that knowledge to other mission-critical parts of your infrastructure. If you're not sure what to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
example, it's time to apply that knowledge to other mission-critical parts of your infrastructure. If you're not sure what to
```

monitor next, check out our list of [collectors](/collectors/COLLECTORS.md) to see what kind of metrics Netdata can
collect from your systems, containers, and applications.

For a more user-friendly anomaly detection experience, try out the [Metric
Correlations](https://learn.netdata.cloud/docs/cloud/insights/metric-correlations) feature in Netdata Cloud. Metric
Correlations runs only at your requests, removing unrelated charts from the dashboard to help you focus on root cause
analysis.

Stay tuned for the next two parts of this guide, which provide more real-world context for the anomalies collector.
First, maximize the immediate value you get from anomaly detection by tracking preconfigured alarms, visualizing
anomalies in charts, and building a new dashboard tailored to your applications. Then, learn about creating custom ML

> models, which help you holistically monitor an application or service by monitor anomalies across a _cluster of charts_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
models, which help you holistically monitor an application or service by monitoring anomalies across a _cluster of charts_.
```

repo](https://github.com/netdata/community/tree/main/netdata-agent-api/netdata-pandas).

```bash
# Become the netdata user
sudo su -s /bin/bash netdata

# Install required packages for the netdata user
pip3 install --user netdata-pandas==0.0.32 numba==0.50.1 scikit-learn==0.23.2 pyod==0.8.3
```

> If the `pip3` command fails, you need to install it. For example, on an Ubuntu system, use `sudo apt install
> python3-pip`.

Use `exit` to become your normal user again.

## Enable the anomalies collector

Navigate to your [Netdata config directory](/docs/configure/nodes.md#the-netdata-config-directory) and use `edit-config`
to open the `python.d.conf` file.

```bash
sudo ./edit-config python.d.conf
```

In `python.d.conf` file, search for the `anomalies` line. If the line exists, set the value to `yes`. Add the line
yourself if it doesn't already exist. Either way, the final result should look like:

```conf
anomalies: yes
```

[Restart the Agent](/docs/configure/start-stop-restart.md) with `sudo systemctl restart netdata` to start up the
anomalies collector. By default, the model training process runs every 30 minutes, and uses the previous 4 hours of

> metrics to establish a baseline for health and performance across the default included charts.

Reviewer: Could also maybe add a note here like

> It might take 30-60 seconds for the anomaly collector to finish its initial training and have enough data to start generating anomaly scores. You might need to refresh your Netdata browser session too for the new Anomalies section to appear on the charts menu.

Not sure if "charts menu" is correct term. Point being once you enable it and restart netdata it might take up to 60 seconds to appear.

## Configure the anomalies collector

Open `python.d/anomalies.conf` with `edit-conf`.

```bash
sudo ./edit-config python.d/anomalies.conf
```

The file contains many user-configurable settings with sane defaults. Here are some important settings that don't
involve tweaking the behavior of the ML training itself.

> - `charts_regex`: Which charts to train against and include in anomaly detection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `charts_regex`: Which charts to train models for and run anomaly detection on.
```

Reviewer: Just trying to make it clear it's a model for each chart as opposed to one giant model for all the charts as i'd say people could get confused about that. Not sure if my words best way but just trying to be explicit everywhere that its a model per chart. Kinda easier to get your head around then i think.

- `charts_to_exclude`: Specific charts, selected by the regex in `charts_regex`, to exclude.
- `train_every_n`: How often to train the ML models.

> - `train_n_secs`: The number of historical metrics to train ML models on. The default is 4 hours, but if your node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `train_n_secs`: The number of historical observations to train each model on. The default is 4 hours, but if your node
```

  doesn't have historical metrics going back that far, consider [changing the metrics retention
  policy](/docs/store/change-metrics-storage.md).
- `custom_models`: A way to define custom models that you want anomaly probabilities for, including multi-node or
  streaming setups.

> 

Reviewer: Could be worth adding a little note in to warn them against doing something silly like trying to set a huge train_n_secs and/or include all charts. That will cause pain. So maybe something like.

> Note that if you set `charts_regex` to cover a lot of charts and/or set `train_n_secs` to be a very large number, then this will impact the resources and time required to train the models. The performance implications here will depend on each node so its best to make incremental changes if you want to include more or different charts and adjust the volume of data used to train the model. `train_max_n` might be useful too here as it will cap via sampling the number of observations actually used to train on.

Reviewer: A bit wordy, But just sort of something to stop people blowing up their node is kinda where i'm coming from (without wanting to scare them out of using it either).
